
                              The Dancers

                           By WILTON HAZZARD

                _There was time now--plenty of time on
             this strange, dark planet--for those erudite
                exiles from frozen Earth to ponder the
                value of man's accumulated knowledge._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Planet Stories January 1952.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


It was the hour before dawn. In the middle of the night the big ship
had landed on the new planet, the satellite of the sun Proxima. Now
they sat in the dark waiting, and they talked.

"I wish we hadn't killed them," Rossiter said softly. His profile was
faintly visible against the diffused light of the stars. "It's a bad
sign, a bad start for a new life."

"They attacked us," Bernard answered quickly.

"Two spears, against forty blasters and stun guns?" Rossiter laughed.
"An attack! We should have met them with stunners at low charge. But
McNess ordered us to blast. The woman and the baby stick in my craw."

"All our nerves were on edge," Bernard answered thoughtfully. "I know I
was afraid when we first stepped out of the ship. There was something
terrifying about air, and space, and the sky. But you're right, of
course. We shouldn't have been ordered to blast." The two men were
sitting a little apart, but there was a murmur of many low voices
around them as the others from the _Elpis_ waited and talked.

"I wonder why they attacked us?" Bernard went on. "Primitives usually
run. We must have been an unbelievable sight to them, spiraling down
out of the sky."

"I don't know," Rossiter replied wearily. "And we can't ask them.
They're dead, all five of them. That wind's cold." He was shivering.

"You could go back inside the ship," Bernard said half-humorously.

"I'm sick of the _Elpis_. We all are. Eight years of it--it's too much.
We'll get used to the wind, I suppose. There's going to be lots of
wind, with so much water and only this one land mass on our new world.
It's not like Earth."

Bernard made an involuntary movement. Then he relaxed. "I suppose the
taboo is lifted now that we've landed," he said heavily. "We can talk
about Earth again, and wonder, and speculate. I wonder what they're
doing now on Earth."

"Starving. Freezing. Burrowing into the ground for coal and warmth.
They must be living a good many hundred feet down now, those that are
left. And the seas are frozen. There's an ice sheet from pole to pole.

"We astronomers paid you back finely, didn't we, Bernard, for all
the appropriations you got us in committee meeting. You were always
generous with us and the physicists. But when the catastrophe happened,
the mystery, the debacle, we couldn't help. We didn't know the answer.
We didn't know."

"I remember--" Bernard answered, choking a little, "--I remember the
day before it happened. There was a report on my desk about some tribe
of Indians high in the Andes. The report said that the parents had been
persuaded to send their children to the school in the foothills, that
even among the adults illiteracy and ignorance were being eliminated.
It was the last of the ignorant tribes.

"I looked up at the sign over my desk and read the motto, 'There
is nothing unknowable. There are only things not yet known,' and I
thought, 'Yes, we're getting near our goal. We've conquered ignorance
and superstition and illiteracy. And as time goes on we'll know more
and more things. The area of the unknown will constantly diminish.
Knowledge is like an expanding circle of light that eats into the
darkness.' Then the darkness came. And you didn't know."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We know what happened well enough," Rossiter corrected. He sounded
older than his fifty-two years. "I was at the observatory that night.
I remember thinking that it was almost time for me to go to the
dormitory to sleep. It was summer; Sirius and the sun would both soon
be up. Sirius rose, blazing in the darkness, and after him Leo, in the
southeast. It should have been invisible in the sunlight. I couldn't
believe what I saw. And still the sun didn't come up.

"We know what happened in a way. We don't know how or why. The sun, our
sun, never rose. The sun just disappeared."

"How softly everyone's speaking," Bernard said irrelevantly. "It's the
sky and the darkness. I could hardly hear you." He got to his feet.

"Where are you going, Tom?" Rossiter asked.

"I want to look at the bodies. The people we blasted, I mean."

"That's morbid. Don't go, Tom. Stay here."

"But I want to go. I'll be back." He moved away through the dimly
visible outlines of men and women seated on the ground.

He came back after a while and sat down by his friend in silence. "I
think I know why they attacked us," he said after a pause.

"Why?"

"I think we interrupted some magical or religious rite. They were at
a very low level of material culture, of course. The points on the
spears were stone, and they were wearing garments of what looked like
some sort of tree bark. Not woven cloth. But the young men were wearing
rattles of some sort of shell around their ankles, and the old man was
holding a little drum in his hands.

"You see, they had a good cranial capacity. As soon as human beings can
think at all, they start trying to impose their will on the universe.
I think they met here by the shore to perform some sort of magic. The
woman and the baby watched, the old man played his drum, the two young
men sang and danced. Perhaps this bit of the coast was sacred to them.
Perhaps, when we set our ship down here, we profaned a sacred place."

"The woman and the baby bother me," Rossiter said thoughtfully. "It
seems a dreadful thing to me to kill a woman. Ever since Kate died...."

Bernard rested his hand for a moment on the older man's shoulder in
sympathy. "It was wrong. We shouldn't have done it," he responded. "But
we must forget it. Tomorrow, when it's light, we'll bury them."

"I wonder if they were the only humanoid life on the planet," Rossiter
said, pursuing his own train of thought "This island was the only land
mass we found anywhere. If those five, so few.... When we blasted them,
did we wipe out the planet's native humanoid life?"

"Possibly," Bernard admitted uneasily. He cleared his throat. "If they
hadn't attacked us we could have helped them. They were primitive,
superstitious, blankly ignorant, of course. But they had good
skulls. They could have learned. We'd have taught them, as we did
the primitives on Earth. We'd have led them gently away from their
superstition and ignorance. As we did on Earth. Let's not talk about it
any more."

Rossiter made a sort of noise. Bernard leaned forward quickly. "What's
the matter, Dick? Are you all right?"

"I--what you said--" Rossiter seemed to grope for words. "Be quiet a
minute, Tom. I want to think. What you said then--I--it--" He laid his
hands over his eyes.

"I'll get Dr. Ferguson," Bernard offered.

"No, I'm all right." Once more he fumbled for words. "I've suddenly
come to understand. You made me understand--_as we did on Earth_."

"What--"

Rossiter got to his feet. In his normal voice, which sounded very loud
in the darkness, he said, "I know what made the sun go out."

The murmur of low talking ceased suddenly. There was a sense of
listening, of half-seen bodies leaning forward intently in the
starlight. Rossiter said, "On Earth there was always somebody dancing."

"Dancing? I don't see--" Bernard spoke in wonderment, but there was an
odd, apprehensive note in his voice.

"There was always somebody dancing," said Rossiter. He halted. Then he
continued in a stronger voice, "Always, in the high mountains there was
somebody fasting and praying. Always before dawn there was the sound of
the rattles and the stamping footsteps.

"In the winter the flame leaped high on the rock through the swirls of
snow as they made fire magic. They danced. They prayed. They chanted.
And the sun came up."

"What are you trying to say?" Bernard demanded. He had risen and was
standing facing the older man.

"That people used to think, before we taught them better, that they had
something to do with the sun's rising. They grew too wise to believe
it any longer. But who knows? Who knows whether they were not right?
Whether the force that impels the stars is not, finally, the human
will?"

There was a silence. Somebody laughed nervously.

Dr. Ferguson had already stepped forward and was holding Rossiter by
the elbow. Together, he and Bernard urged the older man toward the
_Elpis_. They spoke to him gently. They did not argue or disagree with
him. They led him inside the ship.

Much later Bernard came out alone. Dr. Ferguson had remained with
Rossiter, quieting him with sedatives. It was still quite dark.

Bernard looked up at the sky, sighing. "How long the dawn is in
coming," he said, as if to himself.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dancers, by Wilton Hazzard

